## Estes Park Marathon—the 4:14 that felt like a BQ

I set an arbitrary goal at the beginning of 2021 to PR in every “road distance” over the course of the calendar year. To me, this meant a PR in the 5k, 10k, half marathon, and full marathon. At the Estes Park Marathon, I needed to beat a time of 4:02 to PR. I didn’t achieve that goal, but at the risk of sounding more Zen than I really am, I did something even more important with my four+ hours on the course.

I went out hard, and a little bit fearlessly. Although I had an excellent three-month training cycle, I didn’t feel my best during the weeks leading up to the race, because I had some difficulty with my left ankle and wasn’t able to run much during my taper week. I did a lot of meditating and thinking about and visualizing the race; I studied the course more than I have ever done (more like preparing for a hard mountain than a road race with aid provided). Part of this mental training was taking advice from the person I consider my running coach, although we’ve never met and he doesn’t know I exist. The advice was to treat the race as a celebration of the training, and to have the best and most positive mindset you can during the event. I said thank you and hi and good job to every single aid station volunteer, random spectator, and fellow runner that I passed on this course. That was incredibly out of character for me. I’m usually an introvert, with self-diagnosed RBF. But on this day, I smiled at and made eye contact with as many people as I could, making it a huge priority to do so. I believe that this contributed greatly to my overall perception of success in the race—there are studies that show that when you smile, your perception of pain is diminished. Whether I experienced that exact phenomenon or a strong placebo effect because I knew of those studies, I could physically feel my form get smoother and my perceived effort level decrease every time I forced the corners of my mouth upwards. It even got to be less forced and more of an automatic effort that I looked forward to by the end of the race.

As I descended the first 6 miles, I felt untouchable, and took care to try to toe the line of hard and sustainable. I continued to feel strong through the rolling hills around Lake Estes, noting the beauty of the place, and felt amazing on the 4 mile sustained climb from about 13-17 miles. (Half of) my favorite memory from the race is running with a woman at this point, and about 1 mile into the climb hearing her ask, “was that the last hill?” I had to tell her, no, not quite yet. Once we had climbed those long miles though, we had to descend, and I lost contact with most of the group that I had been running with—because I passed them all on the way uphill! That felt great at the time, but it meant that I was completely alone for the last ten miles of the race. As I rounded a corner and started descending, I started to feel pretty sore in my quads and calves. I had expected to feel really good on this descent because the climbing was done, but I was so alone and beat up from the last 18 miles that things started getting more difficult.

I kept on goal pace through mile 21 or so, but it was getting difficult to push hard by myself. This was when the final section of rolling hills started and continued to the end of the race. In all of my race prep, I had imagined this section feeling great: more or less flat, no more huge descents or climbs, the point in the race that I could really hit the goal paces I trained for without adjusting for up- or downhill grade. In actuality, miles 21-26 felt nothing like this. I wasn’t expecting the end of a goal race marathon to feel good, but I also wasn’t expecting to be running almost alone at the end, on rolling hills that felt like the most difficult mountain run after all of the ups and downs earlier in the race. Aid stations were also sparse here, and I had run out of the water I had brought with me right as the temperature neared 80 degrees. I kept checking my watch and trying to push through this difficult section, doing the math over and over to see whether I could still make my goal of finishing in under 4 hours. The answer every time was, “I can do it but it’s gonna be close.” The most challenging point of the race and the final obstacle was the final lap around Lake Estes, because this time around the bike path was crowded with Sunday morning tourists out fishing, walking, and taking in the views. It was difficult to dodge people, run through the blistering sun and heat without any water left to sip (my fault because I drank it all), and try to stay on goal pace while watching my goal time slip away on my watch. Finally at about 23 miles into the race, I realized that unless I was going to pick up the pace and run a full minute faster than I was running for the remainder of the race to even have a chance at coming in under 4 hours, I wasn’t going to make it in under my goal time. I was bitterly disappointed in this revelation for a few minutes and tried desperately to make the necessary pace happen.

At this point, I started walking…and decided that I was going to have a good day regardless of my finishing time. This took some mental gymnastics, because I was so dedicated to the PR race that I trained for, but I can actually say that I was able to convince myself that I was going to have a better experience if I decided to. For the remaining 3 or so miles, I walked and ran in intervals to finish the race. I was feeling so bad, so hot and tired and sore already, but I was determined to finish the race to the best of my ability with the best attitude that I could muster. At this point, the second half of my favorite part of the race happened: the woman that I passed way back around mile 14 caught up with me, and encouraged me to keep going. Her exact words were, “Come on girl, let’s go. You helped me up that hill, now you come with me.” It was instantly easier to actually run—someone was watching me! someone cared about how I was doing right then! We finished the race together, at a pace that could barely be considered jogging, but definitely faster than walking. As I came through the finish line, my friends who had ran the half marathon and finished earlier were cheering for me, and I got to thank my new friend who helped me through the hardest part of the race (and I also got to stop running and sit down which was a blessing that I did not overlook).

Immediately I was proud of the race that I had run. This was a new experience for me. Not the feeling of being totally exhausted by a race effort or missing my goal time, but the feeling content about the outcome and proud of myself regardless. I am often quite hard on myself with regards to goals, and this was the most wonderful example of a time when things can go perfectly in training and almost perfectly for 70% of the race and still come up short in the end. And more importantly, it was a reminder that that’s okay. Your perception of success depends on your measure of success after all—and I decided that my measure that day would be effort, and I gave that race everything I had on that day.

Remember the feel-good effort to smile and make eye contact with every volunteer, spectator, and other racer? That factored into my perception of success as well. Turns out, if I reframe my goals to be (1) try as hard as I possibly can, (2) have the best attitude (with gratitude!) I possibly can, and (3) spread as much love into the world as I possibly can, I have a lot of good days, even when the time on the clock isn’t what I wanted.
